Edits (#2)
krishnangovindraj/typedb-docs: new_core_concepts/modules/ROOT/pages/typeql/query-variables-patterns.adoc

and query the database for concepts which "match" the pattern.
[,typeql]
----
match                 # Find $e and $n such that:
    entity $e;        # $e is an entity type.
    attribute $n;     # $n is an attribute type.
    $n value string;  # $n holds string values.
    $e owns $n;       # $e instances can own instances of '$n'
----

Since *instances* aren't named the same way types are, instances are always bound with variables and constraints.
[,typeql]
----
match
## we want $n, $p, $e to be instances such that all of:

  ## $n is a 'name' with value "John"
  $n isa name; $n == "John";

  ## $p is a `person`, who has the attribute $n
  $p isa person; $p has $n;

  ## $e is an 'employment', where '$p' plays the 'employee' role
  $e isa employment; $e links (employee: $p);
----

> Note that there are multiple equivalent, contracted versions of the query above you may encounter. These are syntactic sugar for the writing out the complete set of constraints:
> 
> [,typeql]
> ----
> match
>   ## attribute-type <value> is a common shorthand
>   $n isa name "John";
>   $p isa person, has $n;
> 
>   ## we can contract multiple constraints on the same variable with a comma
>   $e isa employment, links (employee: $p);
> ----
> 
> Or even shorter:
> [,typeql]
> ----
> match
>   ## omit the attribute variable entirely and use a 'has' shorthand including type and value
>   $p isa person, has name "John";
> 
>   ## omit the 'links' using the relation shorthand
>   $e isa employment (employee, $p);
> ----
> 
> 

Reviewer: Too long for "core concepts". Will shorten
```suggestion
[NOTE]
====
TypeQL provides short-hands allowing the query to be written in a more natural way. Using these, the above query can be rewritten to:
[,typeql]
----
match
  $p isa person,         # Combine constraints on the same subject variable using a comma
   has name "John";  # The type and value of an owned attribute can be specified directly.
  $e isa employment (employee, $p);   # Combine constraints & omit the 'links' keyword.
----
```

whereas an `insert` clause specifies the concepts to bind to the variables, and creates those patterns in the database.

Notice the above query & comments fit naturally:
[,typeql]
----
insert
## create the instances $n, $p, $e such that:

  ## $n is a 'name' with value "John"
  $n isa name; $n == "John";

  ## $p is a `person`, who has the attribute $n
  $p isa person; $p has $n;

  ## $e is an 'employment', where '$p' plays the 'employee' role
  $e isa employment; $e links (employee: $p);
----

Note that `insert` can also use the same pattern and constraint shorthands:
[,typeql]
----
insert
  $n isa name "John";
  $p isa person, has $n;
  $e isa employment, links (employee: $p);
----

Or even shorter:
[,typeql]
----
insert
  $p isa person, has name "John";
  $e isa employment (employee: $p);
----

// ==  Variables
// Before we discuss combining constraints, we need a quick overview of the current variable visibility rules:
//
// Variable names are unique within a pipeline (except when `select` clauses are used).
// Conceptually an answer  is in
//
// Further, TypeDB requires that a

== Disjunctions, negations & optionals

> We often want to write more complex patterns than pure conjunctions, which mean *all* the sub-patterns must be true.

Reviewer: Nice. I like having the motivation.

* *Disjunctions* are conditional matches where any branch that is true will contribute to the matched answer. If none match, the disjunction is considered to not match any data.
* *Negations* are filtering operations. They eliminate answers where the negated sub-pattern is matched

> * *Optional* are partial matches, which permit answers where the optional sub-pattern is matched or not-matched

Reviewer: But these are what we're going to see in this same section. There's no reason to introduce them here.

This section discusses the meaning of disjunctive, negated, and optional patterns.
It also discusses visibility of variables present in each of these sub-patterns.

> TODO: ???

Reviewer: todo

----
   -------------
    $p      | isa person, iid 0x1e00030000000000000004
    $p-name | isa name "John"
    $c      | isa company, iid 0x1e00050000000000000002
    $c-name | isa name "TypeDB"
   -------------
    $p      | isa person, iid 0x1e00030000000000000007
    $p-name | isa name "Jeff"
    $c      | isa company, iid 0x1e00050000000000000002
    $c-name | isa name "TypeDB"
   -------------
    $p      | isa person, iid 0x1e00030000000000000004
    $p-name | isa name "John"
    $c      | isa company, iid 0x1e00050000000000000003
    $c-name | isa name "Shut Shop"
   -------------
    $p      | isa person, iid 0x1e00030000000000000005
    $p-name | isa name "James"
    $c      | isa company, iid 0x1e00050000000000000003
    $c-name | isa name "Shut Shop"
   -------------
    $p      | isa person, iid 0x1e00030000000000000007
    $p-name | isa name "Jeff"
    $c      | isa company, iid 0x1e00050000000000000003
    $c-name | isa name "Shut Shop"
   -------------
Finished. Total rows: 5
----

=== Optionals
A pattern is made optional by wrapping it in a `try` block.
A variable that occurs only inside a `try` block is an optional variable.

> The other variables can be considered input to the pattern. Optional variables can only originate in one `try` block to avoid ambiguity.

Reviewer: Should probably explain why.

If the *entire* optional pattern matches the data, it returns an answer per match.

> If it has no matches (i.e. any part fails), it produces a single answer with every optional variable bound to `None`.

Reviewer: Might revert. I'm leaving this level of detail for the TypeQL manual page.

----

== Reference
* Constraints: xref:{page-version}@new_reference::typeql/statements/index.adoc[Typeql Statements]
* Disjunctions, Negations, optionals: xref:{page-version}@new_reference::typeql/statements/index.adoc[Typeql Patterns]

> TODO: I should probably introduce the ideas of type-inference.

Reviewer: That will be a whole new page.
